.\" To view: groff -man -Tascii eggdrop.1
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1999 - 2025 Eggheads Development Team
.\"
.\" This file is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
.\" under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
.\" WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\"
.TH eggdrop 1 "May 2026" "Eggheads Development Team" "IRC Tools"
.SH NAME
eggdrop \- a modular IRC bot with event-driven architecture
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B eggdrop
.RB [ \-h ]
.RB [ \-v ]
.RB [ \-n ]
.RB [ \-t ]
.RB [ \-c ]
.RB [ \-m ]
.RB [ \-s ]
.RB [ config\-file ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Eggdrop
is a modular Internet Relay Chat (IRC) bot with support for multiple networks,
channels, DCC connections, and scripting via Tcl and Python. It is freely
distributable under the GNU General Public License (GPL v2).
.PP
Eggdrop is a feature-rich program designed to be easily deployed and extended
by both novice and advanced IRC users. The bot can be extended via loadable
modules (written in C) and scripts (Tcl or Python), allowing automated channel
management, user authentication, file transfer, logging, and custom behaviors.
.PP
An IRC bot sits on an IRC channel and performs automated tasks while appearing
as a normal user. Common functions include:
.IP \(bu 3
Channel protection from spam and abuse (modes, bans, kicks)
.IP \(bu 3
User privilege management (op, voice, and custom levels)
.IP \(bu 3
Access control via account-based authentication
.IP \(bu 3
Event logging and audit trails
.IP \(bu 3
File transfer and filesystem access
.IP \(bu 3
Interactive partyline chat
.IP \(bu 3
DNS resolution and CTCP request handling
.IP \(bu 3
DCC file transfer and chat tunneling
.PP
Eggdrop excels at linking multiple bots into a botnet, allowing:
.IP \(bu 3
Secure bot-to-bot links with authentication
.IP \(bu 3
Shared user and ban lists across the botnet
.IP \(bu 3
Distributed channel management and flood protection
.IP \(bu 3
Synchronized account databases
.PP
Eggdrop requires a configuration file to run. For first-time setup, use the
interactive setup wizard with the
.B \-s
flag to generate a TOML configuration file.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h
Display a summary of command-line options and exit.
.TP
.B \-v
Display version information and exit.
.TP
.B \-n
Do not background. Normally, Eggdrop will move itself into the background
when started, allowing the shell to return control. With
.B \-n,
the bot runs in the foreground and log entries are sent to the console.
This is useful for debugging or running under a process supervisor
(e.g., systemd, supervisord).
.TP
.B \-t
Do not background, use terminal mode. Similar to
.B \-n,
except the console simulates an interactive DCC chat session with the bot,
allowing real-time command entry and output. Type
.B .help
to see available commands.
.TP
.B \-c
Do not background, show channel info. Similar to
.B \-n,
except the screen clears every 10 seconds and displays current channel status,
similar to the
.B top
utility. Shows user counts, channel modes, and active DCC connections.
.TP
.B \-m
Create userfile. If no userfile exists, Eggdrop will create one in
creation mode, allowing the first user to identify themselves and gain
owner privileges. This flag is used during initial bot setup.
.TP
.B \-s
Interactive setup wizard. Launches a 5-step interactive wizard that guides
the user through bot configuration (identity, network, channels, file paths,
modules) and writes a TOML configuration file. No config file argument needed.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Eggdrop is configured via a TOML file (
.B eggdrop.toml
by default). The configuration file contains sections for:
.IP \(bu 3
.B [bot]
\- Bot identity (nick, username, realname)
.IP \(bu 3
.B [network]
\- IRC server connection (host, port, SSL/TLS)
.IP \(bu 3
.B [irc]
\- IRC behavior (owner, default flags)
.IP \(bu 3
.B [sasl]
\- SASL authentication mechanism and credentials
.IP \(bu 3
.B [ssl]
\- TLS certificate and cipher configuration
.IP \(bu 3
.B [paths]
\- Userfile, chanfile, logfile, and module directory paths
.IP \(bu 3
.B [modules]
\- Module enable/disable flags
.IP \(bu 3
.B [[chanset]]
\- Per-channel settings (repeating blocks)
.PP
For TOML syntax details and all available settings, consult the
.B INSTALL
and
.B doc/CONFIGURATION
files included in the distribution.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B eggdrop.toml
Default configuration file (may be overridden by command-line argument).
.TP
.B eggdrop.user
Default userfile containing user records and account information.
.TP
.B eggdrop.chan
Default channel file containing channel-specific settings.
.TP
.B help/
Directory containing help text for DCC chat commands.
.TP
.B scripts/
Directory containing Tcl and Python scripts to load at startup.
.TP
.B lib/eggdrop/1.10.1/
Module directory containing shared libraries (.so, .dylib, .dll).
.TP
.B DEBUG
Created on fatal errors; contains version, compilation flags, and crash context.
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.TP
.B EGG_LANG
Specifies the language for Eggdrop console output. Supported values:
.B en
(English, default),
.B da
(Danish),
.B de
(German),
.B es
(Spanish),
.B fi
(Finnish),
.B fr
(French),
.B it
(Italian),
.B pt
(Portuguese).
.TP
.B EGG_LANGDIR
Directory containing language files. Defaults to
.B ./language
relative to the bot's working directory.
.SH SIGNALS
Eggdrop handles the following signals:
.TP
.B SIGTERM
Save user and channel files, and exit cleanly. Scripts can override the
default handler by registering an EVNT bind that returns 1.
.TP
.B SIGHUP
Reload configuration file and reinitialize modules. Scripts can override
by returning 1 from an EVNT bind.
.TP
.B SIGQUIT
Restart the bot immediately (save files, exit, and respawn). Scripts can
override by returning 1 from an EVNT bind.
.TP
.B SIGCHLD
Ignored by default. Can be used to test if the bot is running (send SIGCHLD
to the bot's PID; if no error, the bot is alive).
.TP
.B SIGALRM
Used internally for timer dispatch.
.SH "BUILD AND INSTALLATION"
Eggdrop uses Meson and Ninja for building:
.IP
.nf
meson setup builddir -Dprefix=/usr/local
ninja -C builddir
ninja -C builddir install
.fi
.PP
Key build options:
.IP \(bu 3
.B \-Dtcl=enabled
(default) — Include Tcl scripting support.
.IP \(bu 3
.B \-Dpython=enabled
(default) — Enable Python module.
.IP \(bu 3
.B \-Dhardening=true
(default false) — Enable stack protector, FORTIFY_SOURCE, RELRO.
.IP \(bu 3
.B \-Degg-debug=true
(default false) — Enable AddressSanitizer and UBSanitizer.
.IP \(bu 3
.B \-Dstatic-modules=false
(default) — Build modules as .so; true to link statically.
.IP \(bu 3
.B \-Dmodule-python=true
(default) — Build python.mod if Python found.
.IP \(bu 3
.B \-Dmodule-compress=true
(default) — Build compress.mod if zlib found.
.PP
For complete build instructions, see the
.B INSTALL
file.
.SH "SCRIPTING"
Eggdrop supports scripting via Tcl (optional) and Python (optional):
.TP
.B Tcl
Scripts are registered with event binds:
.IP
.nf
bind PRIVMSG - * my_handler
proc my_handler {nick uhost hand chan text} {
  putchan $chan "Hello, $nick!"
}
.fi
.TP
.B Python
Scripts use decorator-based event registration:
.IP
.nf
from eggtools import on_pub, putchan

@on_pub()
def my_handler(nick, uhost, hand, chan, text):
    putchan(chan, f"Hello, {nick}!")
.fi
.PP
For detailed scripting documentation, see
.B doc/TCL-COMMANDS
and
.B doc/PYTHON
files.
.SH "DOCUMENTATION"
Additional documentation is included in the
.B doc/
directory:
.IP \(bu 3
.B INSTALL
— Installation and build instructions
.IP \(bu 3
.B CONFIGURATION
— Detailed configuration reference
.IP \(bu 3
.B DESIGN
— Architecture and design rationale
.IP \(bu 3
.B BOTNET
— Botnet setup and linking
.IP \(bu 3
.B TCL-COMMANDS
— Tcl API reference
.IP \(bu 3
.B PYTHON
— Python API reference
.IP \(bu 3
.B MODULES
— Module development guide
.PP
Once the bot is running, type
.B .help
in a DCC chat session to access the interactive help system.
.SH "TROUBLESHOOTING"
.TP
.B "Failed to load module: symbol not found"
Ensure modules are built for the same architecture as the bot. Rebuild
with
.B ninja -C builddir clean && ninja -C builddir.
.TP
.B "Connection timeout"
Check firewall rules and IRC server status. Use
.B \-t
flag to see real-time connection output.
.TP
.B "Module command unavailable"
Verify the module is enabled in the configuration and loaded at startup.
Check for errors in the console or log files.
.TP
.B "SASL authentication failed"
Verify SASL credentials in the configuration file match the IRC network
authentication service. Check the DEBUG file for details.
.TP
.B "Crash on startup"
Check for DEBUG or DEBUG.DEBUG files in the working directory for crash
context. Enable
.B \-Degg-debug=true
in a rebuild to get AddressSanitizer output.
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.TP
Create a new configuration interactively:
.IP
.B eggdrop \-s eggdrop.toml
.TP
Run the bot in foreground with console output:
.IP
.B eggdrop \-n eggdrop.toml
.TP
Run in terminal mode for interactive management:
.IP
.B eggdrop \-t eggdrop.toml
.TP
Create the initial userfile and run:
.IP
.B eggdrop \-m eggdrop.toml
.TP
Run under a process supervisor (no backgrounding):
.IP
.B eggdrop \-n eggdrop.toml
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.TP
Online documentation: https://www.eggheads.org/
.TP
IRC channels: #eggdrop on Libera.Chat
.TP
GitHub: https://github.com/eggheads/eggdrop
.SH "AUTHORS"
Written by Robey Pointer, the Eggheads Development Team, and various
contributors. See the files
.B AUTHORS
(development team members),
.B THANKS
(contributors), and
.B doc/Changes
(detailed changelog) in the distribution.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Bugs should be reported via GitHub at
.B https://github.com/eggheads/eggdrop/issues
or via email to
.B bugs@eggheads.org.
See
.B doc/BUG-REPORT
for detailed bug report instructions.
.SH "COPYRIGHT"
Copyright (C) 1997 Robey Pointer
.br
Copyright (C) 1999 - 2025 Eggheads Development Team
.PP
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option)
any later version.
.PP
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public License for
more details.
.PP
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
59 Temple Place - Suite 330, Boston, MA 02111-1307, USA.
.\" end of man page
